---
layout: epic
title: "Team Working Agreements"
date: "2019-12-31"
author: [steve-hicks, adam]
categories: [people, culture, process, team]
---

The culture at Artsy is driven by every team member, not mandated or handed down from above. TODO: Something about
how that culture birthed a wave of team working agreements.

<!-- more -->

TODO: establish consistency of language & title case for "team working agreement"/"working agreement"/"team
agreement"/"agreement"?

Artsy Engineering is part of a larger organization we call PDDE (Product, Design, Data, and Engineering). PDDE is
divided into several product teams, and each team contains at least one representative from product, design, data,
and engineering. Each PDDE team delivers product solutions targeted to a specific product need.

Until recently, those teams could expect a significant change in team members every quarter, as we encouraged
engineers to explore other teams. The purpose of this practice was to spread knowledge throughout the organization,
and give folks the opportunity to keep themselves aligned with projects they found most interesting.

The downside of this practice was that it made teams feel short-lived, impermanent, and unstable. Some teams were
hit harder than others, and they'd see their team completely turn over.

We still encourage team members to explore other teams, but we no longer schedule it quarterly. This has made our
teams feel more stable and long-living. It also has allowed us to start building deeper team identity. Team Working
Agreements are a tool we've introduced to help establish identity.

## How did Team Working Agreements come about at Artsy?

The current breakdown of our PDDE organization is relatively new; it's also an on-going process. We are still
feeling out how these teams will/should work together. One of the core beliefs at Artsy is that when you are a part
of something - a process, a team, a culture - you are empowered to make impactful changes to it.

<aside>
  <div class="answer">
    <img src="/images/artsy-engineering-hiring/adam.jpg">
    <p class="intro">Adam Iskounen says...</p>
    <p>
      TODO Adam: talk about how the agreement came about for galleries (which is I think the first team to establish one)
    </p>
  </div>
</aside>

Since being first defined on Adam's team, team working agreements have spread to most of our engineering teams.
They've been a learning opportunity, and a chance for our team members to share experiences and practices with each
other.

## What's a Team Working Agreement? (suggested heading for "Overview of process")

## Overview of process

### Steps

Describe it in a few sentences:

1. Teach team about team working agreements
2. Conduct a brainstorming meeting

- https://github.com/artsy/README/blob/master/playbooks/agile/team-working-agreement.md#procedure

3. Distill and translate brainstorming ideas into slogan-like habits
4. Vote on the top 5 habits

## Why establish a Team Working Agreement?

### The brainstorm itself is incredibly valuable.

You look at _how_ the team works instead of what the team is working on

- Forces you to discuss soft skills that you don't often discuss, in a context that you don't usually discuss them.
  (with other IC's, with your close collaborators, ....)

- This reminds me of the talk "Ask vs Guess Culture" by Katherine Wu -
  [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FxTXf6qyaGk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FxTXf6qyaGk)

Maybe short-sighted, but at least for now, Steve has seen more value out of the brainstorm than the agreement
itself, because of all the learning you do about each others' habits and values

- This is probably related to the above point about quickening the "feeling out"/"forming" stage of joining a new
  team

- Maybe this will prove incorrect as team agreements live longer (or actually get one done)

### Adam's angle: the process has helped confirm that the team shared interest in team dynamics & the process of

collaboration across the team

As a new member it's nice to know that information

Steve: when joining a new team, there's often a period of "feeling it out" - where I'm afraid to verbalize an
opinion because I'm not sure how the team feels about it. The team working agreement process has definitely helped
lessen this feeling

Is this related to forming/storming/norming/performing?

### Galleries: Better engagement in sprint activities since implementing a team working agreement

The team agreed sprint meetings were valuable

We got a lot out of making slogans for the items.

- "Pair by default", "Incremental improvement over consistency" - got introduced during the discussions & have
  helped solidify the values & habits in agile ceremonies

- They've sort of become the _team's_ values

- There's something to the slogan aspect - it's a bite-size phrase that can inspire members to remember the team
  values

### Long term benefits

When new team members join, they'll have an up-to-date reference of how the team likes to work together.

It will introduce existing team members to the new team members' preferred methods of working.

We are excited to see individual growth as these values and practices become habit/second-nature.

## What are some challenges with Team Working Agreements?

### Uncertainty about what the agreement should include.

Some teams have struggled to identify what belongs on a team agreement. Should it describe our team values? Habits?
Procedures? Rules?

It likely varies from team to team what you want here. It's definitely important that you identify what you're
looking for up front, and make it clear heading into the brainstorm. Suggest categories, sample habits, & questions
to ask heading into the brainstorm, and keep them visible during the meeting.

Be cautious about introducing individual bias, though.

<aside>
  <div class="answer">
    <img src="/images/artsy-engineering-hiring/steve.jpg">
    <p class="intro">Steve Hicks says...</p>
    <p>
      Having been through a brainstorm on another team where I felt like we spent too much time talking about things I deemed retro action items rather than working agreement items, I made a strong effort on another team to constrain the suggestions to avoid a repeat. To me, team values were really important for this new team - and I did such a good job of encouraging those types of suggestions that it's pretty much all we ended up with.
    </p>
    <p>
      While this made me feel like I understood the values of my team better, we're months later _still_ paying for this bias. Our agreement lacked important procedural and tactical definition. We've been adding things like JIRA hygiene and responsibilities of project leaders as they come up, but I would not push a working agreement brainstorm so strongly in one direction again.
    </p>
  </div>
</aside>

### Agreements are hard to define for teams without a well-established identity.

For a team that has been together for a while, and which has established an identity, the agreement is likely to
affirm many things the team is already believing and doing. For a newer team, or a team that is not very aligned on
their identity, the agreement is harder to pin down. Many opinions will surface, and they may be in conflict with
each other.

While this is indeed challenging, it is also important to note that teams that lack identity value _greatly_ from
the team agreement brainstorm. Provided there is psychological safety, this is a really great time for the team to
learn about what matters to each other, and move toward establishing an identity.

### Facilitating the brainstorm on a distributed team.

Some of our teams were able to brainstorm with everyone on-site. They were able to rely on post-it notes and
in-person conversations, and read each other's non-verbal communication. Other teams needed to accommodate remote
members, and used tools like Miro (TODO: link) to facilitate. This _can_ present a challenge...but if you're
already a distributed team, they are likely the same types of challenges you've worked to overcome for _all_
meetings.

The differences are worth noting, though. The importance of reading each other's non-verbal communication is
magnified when you're having conversations about identity. It's quicker to organize and re-organize real-life
post-its than virtual post-its in an online tool. These are all opportunities to get better at being a distributed
team.

### It takes effort to make sure one person isn't introducing their bias into the agreement.

It's important for the working agreement brainstorm to provide an environment in which every team member is heard.
Even if your team is successful at this, there are still opportunities for individual bias to affect the agreement.

We saw earlier how bias can appear when the examples provided for the brainstorm are too narrowly scoped.

We recognized another opportunity for bias to appear in the distillation of the brainstorm into an actual
agreement. If this is handled by a single person, it's very possible for them to produce an agreement that
misrepresents _the rest_ of the team. To counter this, we've had multiple team members pair on the distillation
process. Feedback on the initial draft of the agreement is also important to ensure it does not misrepresent the
team's ideas.

The problem of introducing bias to the distillation process is most challenging with topics that are disputed
across the team. One of our teams spent a lot of time talking about meetings in their brainstorm, but struggled to
come to consensus on them. No single person, or even a pair, could add a disputed topic like this to the agreement
without introducing their personal bias. In this specific case, the team chose to leave meetings off the agreement
until they could reach consensus.

### Team health is easy to overlook

One of our teams put the act of distilling the brainstorm notes into an agreement on one person. That person became
busier than expected, didn't get a chance to write the agreement, and the team's agreement did not progress. (TODO:
fact-check. I have notes that this happened to Purchase, but I don't know if they progressed or not.)

Just as personal self-care gets put on the back burner during stressful times, creating a working agreement is easy
to bump down the backlog during intense periods of sprint work. The longer a team drags out the working agreement
process, the more context is lost from the original brainstorm. We recommend not letting your working agreement
linger.

It's also important to revisit the agreement often. It is a living document, not one-and-done. Review the agreement
as a team occasionally; update the agreement as your team learns how to collaborate better; cultivate the
agreement. If an agreement gets stale, it will become inaccurate, meaningless, and unused.

### What does it even mean to have a team working agreement?

A team working agreement is a neat artifact. The brainstorm process has great value. But there is non-obvious work
involved in turning a team working agreement into the team culture. We have many questions that we aren't sure how
to answer:

- How do you enforce the agreement?

- **Should** you enforce the agreement?

- How do you get the entire team to embrace it?

- What happens when the agreement is violated or disrespected?

If you're using working agreements on your team and you've got answers for us, or you want to start using them and
have more questions, we'd love to hear from you!
