---
layout: epic
title: "Server-Rendering Responsively"
date: "2019-04-22"
author: [steve-hicks]
categories: [react, html, web]
---

We use server-side rendering (SSR) to deliver every page you hit on [artsy.net](https://artsy.net). We decided on
using SSR for many reasons, amongst them performance. (TODO: Maybe more about why we chose SSR, but I don't know
much about that history.)

We've also built our site using responsive design, so you get a browsing experience optimized for your device.

Combining SSR and responsive design is a non-trivial problem. There are many concerns to manage, and they are
sometimes in conflict with each other. We server render for performance reasons, but we also want to be sure our
app is performant when your browser takes over, all while optimizing for accessibility and SEO.

This article describes the tools we use on [artsy.net](https://artsy.net) to combine SSR and responsive design.

<!-- more -->

## Tool 1: [`styled-system`](https://styled-system.com)

We handle the majority of responsive styling differences with
[`styled-system`](https://styled-system.com/responsive-styles). This has been a really great addition to our
toolbox. Here's a component that would render a `div` (`Box`) with a width of 50% at our mobile breakpoint, 75% at
our tablet breakpoint, and 100% for anything larger:

```xml
<Box width={["50%", "75%", "100%"]}>
  ...
</Box>
```

As developers, we love this experience. We can make subtle differences to components across breakpoints with very
little code and effort.

We're working on another blog post that digs deeper into how we use `styled-system` within
[our design system](https://palette.artsy.net/). You can also
[poke around our source](https://github.com/artsy/reaction/blob/f3dabb884d616c5c42bbd47b1432dc2a9456b8ca/src/Apps/Search/Components/SearchResultsSkeleton/Header.tsx#L6)
to see how much we've embraced `styled-system`'s responsive styles. (In that example, `pr` means `padding-right`
and `pl` means `padding-left`.)

There's one type of challenge with building a responsive app that `styled-system` can't solve: when we need to emit
different layouts across different breakpoints. In this case, we need something that can render very different
component sub-trees. We couldn't find an approach that satisfied our needs, so we wrote our own.

## Tool 2: [`@artsy/react-responsive-media`](https://github.com/artsy/react-responsive-media)

First off, an announcement: we've just released `react-responsive-media` version 1.0! (TODO: release v1.0 ðŸ˜¬ or
change this announcement)

`react-responsive-media` allows you to define a set of breakpoint widths, then declaratively render component
sub-trees when those breakpoints are met. It looks something like this:

```xml
<>
  <Media at="xs">
    <MobileLayout />
  </Media>
  <Media greaterThan="xs">
    <NonMobileLayout />
  </Media>
</>
```

In this example, we're emitting the `MobileLayout` component for devices at or below our `xs` breakpoint, and the
`NonMobileLayout` for devices greater than our `xs` breakpoint. You can imagine that the `MobileLayout` and
`NonMobileLayout` components are complicated sub-trees, with more significant differences than `styled-system`
could handle.

### How it works

The first important thing to note is that when server-rendering with `react-responsive-media`, **all** breakpoints
get rendered by the server.

Why not just the one that the current device needs? A couple reasons. First, we can't _accurately_ identify which
breakpoint your device needs from the server. We could use a library to sniff the browser `user-agent`, but those
aren't always accurate, and they wouldn't give us all the information we need to know when we are server-rendering.

The other reason `react-responsive-media` renders _all_ breakpoints has to do with the hydration of a
server-rendered React app. When using SSR in a React app, you need to call
[`ReactDOM.hydrate()`](https://reactjs.org/docs/react-dom.html#hydrate) to connect your server-rendered app to the
client's browser. As the docs describe,

> React expects that the rendered content is identical between the server and the client.

If there are differences between your server-rendered component tree and the initial client-rendered component
tree, a couple things will happen.

1. You'll get a friendly error in your console telling you there were differences (in development mode), but
   also...
2. weird, unpredictable things will happen to your app.

Here's what our app looked like in one case where our client render didn't match our server render:

(TODO: image of spinning body)

Yuck! The docs explain that `ReactDOM.hydrate` doesn't put a lot of effort into patching up differences between the
server and client renders, and that's how you end up with weird things like above.

Because hydration is so picky about the component trees matching between server and client, we render _all_
breakpoints from the server with `react-responsive-media`. This way, we know you're going to get a branch that
matches between the client and server. Then, upon hydration, we prune the branches that don't match the current
breakpoint.

## Tool 3: [`@artsy/detect-responsive-traits`](https://github.com/artsy/detect-responsive-traits)

I mentioned above that it's difficult to accurately detect devices by user agent to identify which breakpoint to
render. We didn't want this to be our primary strategy for combining SSR with responsive design.

But with `react-responsive-media` as our primary approach, we felt that we could make some further optimizations
with user agent detection. In the event that we don't know your device by its user agent, we'll still give you both
the desktop and mobile breakpoints from SSR. But if we are certain you are on a mobile device, we can omit the
desktop breakpoint from the server render.

We really wanted to not maintain our own list of user agents. Alas, we found that none of the existing user agent
detection libraries surfaced all the information we needed. We needed to know the minimum width for a browser on a
given device, and if it was resizable, and to what dimensions it was resizable. If any existing libraries _did_
have this data, they didn't provide it to us easily.

So we did some experimentation, given the browsers and devices we knew we needed to support. And yeah...we
(reluctantly) created our own user-agent detection library,
[@artsy/detect-responsive-traits](https://github.com/artsy/detect-responsive-traits). This data is very specific to
the browsers and devices we support on [artsy.net](artsy.net), but it's the data we need to optimize our responsive
rendering. We're using it to determine if your browser is likely going to use only the mobile breakpoint of our
app, in which case we don't have to also render the desktop version.

We aren't doing any detection of desktop browsers. Maybe this is something we do in the future, but for now we are
more concerned with mobile users getting less content sent over their 3G connection.

## Why didn't you use \_\_\_?

Those are our primary tools for combining SSR with responsive design! They work well for us. We considered many
many other options along the way. Here are a couple:

### [`react-media`](https://github.com/ReactTraining/react-media) or [`react-responsive`]()

We investigated both `react-media` and `react-responsive`, but found that they didn't approach the SSR side of the
problem as deeply as we needed.

We also weren't fans of the imperative API in `react-media`. We started with a similar API when building
`react-responsive-media`, but learned that it limited our ability to render all breakpoints from the server. The
API requires only one branch to be rendered, and this caused the aforementioned mismatches when the app would
hydrate.

With `react-responsive`, we didn't like that it relied on user agent detection as its primary method of handling
SSR.

(TODO: are those statements correct?)

### CSS

We explored the idea of rendering all breakpoints from the server, and hiding the non-matching branches with CSS.
The issue with this approach is that you have many components that are mounted and rendered unnecessarily. Aside from
the performance hit you take for rendering components your user isn't seeing, even worse is the potential for
duplicate side-effects.

Imagine a component that, when rendered, emits a call to an analytics service. If this component exists in both a
mobile and desktop branch, you're now double-stuffing your analytics. Hopefully your analytics service is smart
enough to count both calls, but it's still a bad idea to duplicate components that have side-effects.

## What's left to solve?

Our SSR and responsive design toolbox does a lot of things well. We get great performance from both the server and
client. Our site looks great on any device.

We do have some SEO concerns, though. Since we're server-rendering multiple breakpoints, it's likely that search
engine bots are seeing double the content on our pages. We _think_ this is okay.
[Google WebMasters](https://youtu.be/WsgrSxCmMbM) says it's okay. We haven't noticed any awful side-effects from
this yet, but SEO is a bit of a dark art, yeah?

We _have_ had some issues where Google is showing limited data for some of our pages. We don't know yet if it is
related to truncation we're doing at the mobile breakpoint, but we're investigating!

(Note: I originally had in the outline accessibility as a potential concern, but from my notes and trying to put it
into words, I couldn't determine any reason to be concerned with specific regard to SSR/responsive.)

## Our advice

Responsive design is hard, especially when layouts change significantly between desktop and mobile. Server side
rendering in React is hard to get right, period. Hydration errors are easy to introduce and can break your app in
weird and unexpected ways. Adding responsiveness on top of that just makes it that much more complicated.

At the end of the day, do everything you can to limit layout differences between mobile and desktop. Use
`styled-system`'s responsive props. Play around with `flexbox`'s `flexDirection` and start learning about CSS
`grid`. If you absolutely must render different views on different breakpoints, render all the UI and hide what's
not needed for that breakpoint. That's the best we can do given the current state of SSR hydration.
